Capstone Project 20.1: Initial Report and Exploratory Data Analysis

Business Understanding

Nuclear explosion monitoring and detonation detection systems use signals collected from a global network of seismic, infrasonic hydroacoustic, and air-sampling sensors as well as an array of orbiting satellites with cameras and radiation detecting sensors (see CTBTO IMS).  All nuclear weapons testing has gone underground since 1960’s due to concerns of public safety from atmospheric tests.  U.S. and international monitoring agencies rely heavily on seismic sensors to detect, locate, and discriminate clandestine nuclear tests in a sea of background activity from natural earthquakes, volcanic activity, bolides, anthropogenic explosions from industrial activity, and cavity collapses from mining (see graphic). 

State-of-the-art algorithms developed in the 1980s and 1990s automatically process seismic data to make detections, associate signals into events, and locate events. However, pipeline seismic analysis workflow (e.g., earthquake, volcanic, and explosion monitoring observatories) still requires teams of human analysts who work shifts 24/7, to refine measurements and retune algorithms. The burden on these human analysts is growing as the number of sensors grows due to technological advances (see graphic). Artificial intelligence and machine learning algorithms are needed to help modernize seismic data processing.  
Early focus was on seismic signal detection (e.g., Ross et al., 2018; Kong et al., 2018; Mousavi et al., 2020) using deep learning approaches. We focus here on the final step of seismic processing workflow – discrimination or identification -- that requires classifying a set of signals from a seismic event as either explosion, earthquake or collapse based on the radiation pattern of the signals recorded by a network of sensors. 

In the world of nuclear explosion monitoring, the mantra is “miss no explosion” even at the expense of having false alarms.  The consequences of missed detection is much higher than falsely accusing a nation for testing a nuclear weapon (see new article on the 1997 Kara Sea Event).   In this case we will focus more on metrics like precision and balanced accuracy than recall, f1-score, or accuracy. 
